swarm(1)                                    USER COMMANDS                                    swarm(1)

NAME
       swarm — find clusters of nearly-identical nucleotide amplicons

SYNOPSIS
       swarm -h|v

       High-precision clustering:

       swarm [filename]

       swarm [-d 1] [-nrz] [-a int] [-i filename] [-j filename] [-l filename] [-o filename]
             [-s filename] [-t int] [-u filename] [-w filename] [filename]

       swarm [-d 1] -f [-nrz] [-a int] [-b int] [-c|y int] [-i filename] [-j filename] [-l filename]
             [-o filename] [-s filename] [-t int] [-u filename] [-w filename] [filename]

       Conservative clustering:

       swarm -d 2+ [-nrxz] [-a int] [-e int] [-g int] [-i filename] [-l filename] [-m int]
             [-o filename] [-p int] [-s filename] [-t int] [-u filename] [-w filename] [filename]

       Dereplication (merge strictly identical sequences):

       swarm -d 0 [-rz] [-a int] [-i filename] [-l filename] [-o filename] [-s filename]
             [-u filename] [-w filename] [filename]

DESCRIPTION
       Environmental  or clinical molecular studies generate large volumes of amplicons (e.g., 16S or
       18S SSU-rRNA sequences) that need to be grouped into clusters. Traditional clustering  methods
       are  based  on  greedy,  input-order dependent algorithms, with arbitrary selection of cluster
       centroids and cluster limits (often 97%-similarity). To address  that  problem,  we  developed
       swarm,  a  fast and robust method that recursively groups amplicons with d or less differences
       (i.e. substitutions, insertions or deletions). swarm produces natural and stable clusters cen‐
       tered on local peaks of abundance, mostly free from input-order dependency induced by centroid
       selection.

       Exact clustering is impractical on large data sets when  using  a  naïve  all-vs-all  approach
       (more  precisely  a  2-combination  without repetitions), as it implies unrealistic numbers of
       pairwise comparisons. swarm is based on a maximum number of differences d between  two  ampli‐
       cons,  and focuses only on very close local relationships. For d = 1, the default value, swarm
       uses an algorithm of linear complexity that generates all possible single mutations  and  per‐
       forms  exact-string matching by comparing hash-values. For d = 2 or greater, swarm uses an al‐
       gorithm of quadratic complexity that performs pairwise string comparisons. An efficient k-mer-
       based filtering and an astute use  of  comparisons  results  obtained  during  the  clustering
       process  allows swarm to avoid most of the amplicon comparisons needed in a naïve approach. To
       speed up the remaining amplicon comparisons, swarm implements an extremely fast Needleman-Wun‐
       sch algorithm making use of the Streaming SIMD Extensions (SSE2) of x86-64 CPUs, NEON instruc‐
       tions of ARM64 CPUs, or Altivec/VMX instructions of POWER8 CPUs. If SSE2 instructions are  not
       available, swarm exits with an error message.

       swarm  can  read  nucleotide amplicons in fasta format from a normal file or from the standard
       input (using a pipe or a redirection). The amplicon header is defined as the string  comprised
       between the '>' symbol and the first space or the end of the line, whichever comes first. Each
       header must end with an abundance annotation representing the amplicon copy number and defined
       as  '_'  followed  by a positive integer. See option -z for input data using usearch/vsearch's
       abundance annotation format (';size=integer[;]'). Once stripped from the abundance annotation,
       the remaining part of the header is call the label. In summary, using regular expression  pat‐
       terns:

                           >header[[:blank:]]   and   header = label_[1-9][0-9]*$

       Abundance  annotations  play a crucial role in the clustering process, and swarm exits with an
       error message if that information is not available. As swarm outputs lists of amplicon labels,
       amplicon labels must be unique to avoid any ambiguity; swarm exits with an  error  message  if
       labels  are  not unique. The amplicon sequence is defined as a string of [ACGT] or [ACGU] sym‐
       bols (case insensitive, 'U' is replaced with 'T' internally), starting after the  end  of  the
       header  line  and  ending  before the next header line or the file end; swarm silently removes
       newline symbols ('\n' or '\r') and exits with an error message if any other symbol is present.
       Accepted sequence lengths range from 1 nucleotide to 67 million nucleotides. Please note  that
       processing  67-Mb sequences requires at least 32 gigabytes of memory. Lastly, if sequences are
       not all unique, i.e. were not properly dereplicated, swarm will exit with an error message.

       Clusters are written to output files (specified with -i, -o, -s and -u)  by  decreasing  abun‐
       dance  of their seed sequences, and then by alphabetical order of seed sequence labels. An ex‐
       ception to that is the -w (--seeds) output, which is sorted by  decreasing  cluster  abundance
       (sum  of  abundances  of all sequences in the cluster), and then by alphabetical order of seed
       sequence labels. This is particularly useful  for  post-clustering  steps,  such  as  de  novo
       chimera detection, that require clusters to be sorted by decreasing abundances.

   General options
       -h, --help
                display this help and exit successfully.

       -t, --threads positive integer
                number  of  computation threads to use. Values between 1 and 512 are accepted, but we
                recommend to use a number of threads lesser or equal to the number of  available  CPU
                cores. Default number of threads is 1.

       -v, --version
                output version information and exit successfully.

       --       delimit  the  option  list.  Later arguments, if any, are treated as operands even if
                they begin with '-'.  For  example,  'swarm  --  -file.fasta'  reads  from  the  file
                '-file.fasta'.

   Clustering options
       -d, --differences zero or positive integer
                maximum  number of differences allowed between two amplicons, meaning that two ampli‐
                cons will be grouped if they have integer (or less) differences. This is swarm's most
                important parameter. The number of differences is calculated as the  number  of  mis‐
                matches  (substitutions,  insertions or deletions) between the two amplicons once the
                optimal pairwise global alignment has been found (see  'pairwise  alignment  advanced
                options' to influence that step).

                Any  integer from 0 to 255 can be used, but high d values will decrease the taxonomi‐
                cal resolution of swarm results. Commonly used d values are 1, 2 or 3, rarely higher.
                When using d = 0, swarm will output results corresponding to a  strict  dereplication
                of  the  dataset,  i.e.  merging  identical amplicons. Warning, whatever the d value,
                swarm requires fasta entries to present abundance values. Default number  of  differ‐
                ences d is 1.

       -n, --no-otu-breaking
                when  working  with  d  =  1,  deactivate the built-in cluster refinement (not recom‐
                mended). Amplicon abundance values are used to identify transitions among  in-contact
                clusters  and  to  separate them, yielding higher-resolution clustering results. That
                option prevents that separation, and in practice, allows the creation of a  link  be‐
                tween  amplicons  A and B, even if the abundance of B is higher than the abundance of
                A.

   Fastidious options
       -b, --boundary positive integer
                when using the option --fastidious (-f), define the minimum abundance of what  should
                be  considered  a large cluster. By default, a cluster with a total abundance of 3 or
                more is considered large. Conversely, a cluster is small if it has a total  abundance
                of  2  or less, meaning that it is composed of either one amplicon of abundance 2, or
                two amplicons of abundance 1, or one amplicon of  abundance  1.  Any  positive  value
                greater  than  1 can be specified. Using higher boundary values can reduce the number
                of clusters (up to a point), and will reduce the taxonomical resolution of swarm  re‐
                sults. It will also slightly increase computation time.

       -c, --ceiling positive integer
                when  using the option --fastidious (-f), define swarm's maximum memory footprint (in
                megabytes). swarm will adjust the --bloom-bits (-y) value of the Bloom filter to  fit
                within the specified amount of memory. Values accepted range from 40 to 1,073,741,824
                megabytes.  See  the  --bloom-bits  (-y) option for an alternative way to control the
                memory footprint.

       -f, --fastidious
                when working with d = 1, perform a second clustering pass to  reduce  the  number  of
                small  clusters (recommended option). During the first clustering pass, an intermedi‐
                ate amplicon can be missing for purely stochastic reasons, interrupting the  aggrega‐
                tion  process. The fastidious option will create virtual amplicons, allowing to graft
                small clusters upon larger ones. By default, a cluster is considered large if it  has
                a total abundance of 3 or more (see the --boundary option to modify that value).

                To speed things up, swarm uses a Bloom filter to store intermediate results. Warning,
                the  second  clustering  pass  can be 2 to 3 times slower than the first pass and re‐
                quires much more memory to store the virtual amplicons in Bloom filters. See the  op‐
                tions  --bloom-bits  (-y)  or  --ceiling  (-c) to control the memory footprint of the
                Bloom filter.

                The fastidious option modifies clustering results: the output files produced  by  the
                options  --log  (-l),  --output-file  (-o), --mothur (-r), --uclust-file, and --seeds
                (-w) are updated to reflect these modifications; the file --statistics-file  (-s)  is
                partially  updated  (columns  6  and  7  are  not  updated); the output file --inter‐
                nal-structure (-i) is partially updated (column 5 is not updated for  amplicons  that
                belonged to the small cluster).

       -y, --bloom-bits positive integer
                when  using  the option --fastidious (-f), define the size (in bits) of each entry in
                the Bloom filter. That option allows to balance the efficiency (i.e. speed)  and  the
                memory  footprint  of  the Bloom filter. Large values will make the Bloom filter more
                efficient but will require more memory. Any value between 2 and 64 can be  used.  De‐
                fault  value  is  16. See the --ceiling (-c) option for an alternative way to control
                the memory footprint.

   Input/output options
       -a, --append-abundance positive integer
                set abundance value to use when some or all amplicons in the input  file  lack  abun‐
                dance  values  (_integer, or ;size=integer; when using -z). Warning, it is not recom‐
                mended to use swarm on datasets where abundance values are all identical. We  provide
                that  option  as  a  courtesy to advanced users, please use it carefully. swarm exits
                with an error message if abundance values are missing and if this option is not used.

       -i, --internal-structure filename
                output all pairs of nearly-identical amplicons to filename using a  five-column  tab-
                delimited format:

                       1.  amplicon A label (header without abundance annotations).

                       2.  amplicon B label (header without abundance annotations).

                       3.  number of differences between amplicons A and B (positive integer).

                       4.  cluster number (positive integer). Clusters are numbered in their order of
                           delineation, starting from 1. All pairs of amplicons belonging to the same
                           cluster will receive the same number.

                       5.  cummulated  number  of steps from the cluster seed to amplicon B (positive
                           integer). When using the option --fastidious (-f), the  actual  number  of
                           steps between grafted amplicons and the cluster seed cannot be re-computed
                           efficiently and is always set to 2 for the amplicon pair linking the small
                           cluster  to  the  large  cluster.  Cummulated number of steps in the small
                           cluster (if any) are left unchanged.

       -j, --network-file filename
                (advanced users) when working with d = 1, dump raw amplicon network to filename using
                a two-column tab-delimited table of headers with  abundance  annotations.  Each  line
                represents  a connection between two similar amplicons, from the most abundant to the
                lesser abundant. When amplicons have the same abundance value, connections are bi-di‐
                rectional and are represented on two lines: A to B, then B to A.

                In order to delineate clusters and to compute the equivalent of  a  minimal  spanning
                tree for each cluster (see option --internal-structure), swarm first builds a network
                of  similar  amplicons.  This  option is for advanced users who would like to explore
                this raw network.

       -l, --log filename
                output all messages to filename instead of standard error, with the exception of  er‐
                ror messages of course. That option is useful in situations where writing to standard
                error is problematic (for example, with certain job schedulers).

       -o, --output-file filename
                output  clustering  results  to  filename. Results consist of a list of clusters, one
                cluster per line. A cluster is a list of amplicon headers separated by  spaces.  That
                output  format  can  be  modified by the option --mothur (-r). Default is to write to
                standard output.

       -r, --mothur
                output clustering results in a format compatible with Mothur.  That  option  modifies
                swarm's default output format.

       -s, --statistics-file filename
                output statistics to filename. The file is a tab-separated table with one cluster per
                row and seven columns of information:

                       1.  number of unique amplicons in the cluster,

                       2.  total abundance of amplicons in the cluster,

                       3.  label of the initial seed (header without abundance annotations),

                       4.  abundance of the initial seed,

                       5.  number of amplicons with an abundance of 1 in the cluster,

                       6.  maximum number of iterations before the cluster reached its natural limit,

                       7.  cummulated  number  of  steps along the path joining the seed and the fur‐
                           thermost amplicon in the cluster. Please note that the  actual  number  of
                           differences  between the seed and the furthermost amplicon is usually much
                           smaller. When using the option --fastidious (-f),  grafted  amplicons  are
                           not taken into account.

       -u, --uclust-file filename
                output  clustering  results in filename using a tab-separated uclust-like format with
                10 columns and 3 different type of entries (S, H or C). That option does  not  modify
                swarm's  default output format. Each fasta sequence in the input file can be either a
                cluster centroid (S) or a hit (H) assigned to a cluster. Cluster records  (C)  summa‐
                rize  information  for each cluster (number of hits, centroid header). Column content
                varies with the type of entry (S, H or C):

                       1.  Record type: S, H, or C.

                       2.  Cluster number (zero-based).

                       3.  Centroid length (S), query length (H), or number of hits (C).

                       4.  Percentage of similarity with the centroid sequence (H), or set to '*' (S,
                           C).

                       5.  Match orientation + or - (H), or set to '*' (S, C).

                       6.  Not used, always set to '*' (S, C) or to zero (H).

                       7.  Not used, always set to '*' (S, C) or to zero (H).

                       8.  set to '*' (S, C) or, for H, compact representation of the pairwise align‐
                           ment using the CIGAR format (Compact Idiosyncratic  Gapped  Alignment  Re‐
                           port): M (match), D (deletion) and I (insertion). The equal sign '=' indi‐
                           cates that the query is identical to the centroid sequence.

                       9.  Header of the query sequence (H), or of the centroid sequence (S, C).

                       10. Header of the centroid sequence (H), or set to '*' (S, C).

       -w, --seeds filename
                output  cluster  representative  sequences to filename in fasta format. The abundance
                value of each cluster representative is the sum of the abundances of all  the  ampli‐
                cons  in  the  cluster.  Fasta  headers are formated as follows: '>label_integer', or
                '>label;size=integer;' if the -z option is used, and sequences  are  uppercased.  Se‐
                quences  are  sorted  by  decreasing abundance, and then by alphabetical order of se‐
                quence labels.

       -z, --usearch-abundance
                accept amplicon abundance values in usearch/vsearch's style (>label;size=integer[;]).
                That option influences the abundance annotation style used in swarm's standard output
                (-o), as well as the output of options -r, -u and -w.

   Pairwise alignment advanced options
       when using d > 1, swarm recognizes advanced command-line options modifying the pairwise global
       alignment scoring parameters:

              -m, --match-reward positive integer
                       Default reward for a nucleotide match is 5.

              -p, --mismatch-penalty positive integer
                       Default penalty for a nucleotide mismatch is 4.

              -g, --gap-opening-penalty positive integer
                       Default gap opening penalty is 12.

              -e, --gap-extension-penalty positive integer
                       Default gap extension penalty is 4.

              -x, --disable-sse3
                       On the x86-64 CPU architecture, disable SSE3 and later instructions. This  op‐
                       tion is meant for developers, not for regular users.

       As  swarm  focuses on close relationships (e.g., d = 2 or 3), clustering results are resilient
       to pairwise alignment model parameters modifications. When clustering using a higher d  value,
       modifying model parameters has a stronger impact.

EXAMPLES
       Clusterize  the  compressed data set myfile.fasta using the finest resolution possible (1 dif‐
       ference by default, built-in breaking, fastidious option) using 4 computation  threads.  Clus‐
       ters  are  written  to  the file myfile.swarms, and cluster representatives are written to my‐
       file.representatives.fasta:
              zcat myfile.fasta.gz | \
                  swarm \
                      -t 4 \
                      -f \
                      -w myfile.representatives.fasta \
                      -o myfile.swarms

AUTHORS
       Concept by Frédéric Mahé, implementation by Torbjørn Rognes.

CITATION
       Mahé F, Rognes T, Quince C, de Vargas C, Dunthorn M. (2014) Swarm: robust and fast  clustering
       method for amplicon-based studies.  PeerJ 2:e593 https://doi.org/10.7717/peerj.593.

       Mahé  F,  Rognes  T,  Quince  C, de Vargas C, Dunthorn M. (2015) Swarm v2: highly-scalable and
       high-resolution amplicon clustering.  PeerJ 3:e1420 https://doi.org/10.7717/peerj.1420.

       Mahé F, Czech L, Stamatakis A, Quince C, de Vargas C, Dunthorn M, Rognes T. (2021)  Swarm  v3:
       towards  tera-scale  amplicon clustering.  Bioinformatics https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformat‐
       ics/btab493.

REPORTING BUGS
       Submit suggestions and bug-reports at https://github.com/torognes/swarm/issues,  send  a  pull
       request  at  https://github.com/torognes/swarm/pulls, or compose a friendly or curmudgeonly e-
       mail to Frédéric Mahé and Torbjørn Rognes.

AVAILABILITY
       Source code and binaries available at https://github.com/torognes/swarm.

COPYRIGHT
       Copyright (C) 2012-2025 Frédéric Mahé & Torbjørn Rognes

       This program is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the terms of the
       GNU Affero General Public License as published by the Free Software Foundation, either version
       3 of the License, or any later version.

       This program is distributed in the hope that it will be  useful,  but  WITHOUT  ANY  WARRANTY;
       without  even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. See
       the GNU Affero General Public License for more details.

       You should have received a copy of the GNU Affero General Public License along with this  pro‐
       gram.  If not, see https://www.gnu.org/licenses/.

SEE ALSO
       swipe,  an extremely fast Smith-Waterman database search tool by Torbjørn Rognes (available at
       https://github.com/torognes/swipe).

       vsearch, an open-source re-implementation of the classic uclust clustering method  (by  Robert
       C.  Edgar), along with other amplicon filtering and searching tools. vsearch is implemented by
       Torbjørn   Rognes   and   documented   by    Frédéric    Mahé,    and    is    available    at
       https://github.com/torognes/vsearch.

VERSION HISTORY
       New  features  and important modifications of swarm (short lived or minor bug releases are not
       mentioned):

              v3.1.6 released November 7, 2025
                     Version 3.1.6 is a maintenance release. It fixes some compilation warnings (mem‐
                     ory alignment) and static analysis warnings, and adds more compile-time  checks.
                     It  brings  more  general  performance, notably when using d = 0. However, a 15%
                     slowdown was observed with vertain datasets when using d >=  2  (18SV9  dataset,
                     x86-64 CPU, GCC 11.5).

              v3.1.5 released March 31, 2024
                     Version  3.1.5 changes the minimal value for the ceiling option from 8 megabytes
                     to 40 megabytes, and fixes four minor bugs. Warning, peak RSS  memory  increased
                     by  5 to 10% when d >= 2. Version 3.1.5 improves documentation (now covering op‐
                     tion --network_file), adds more compilation checks and eliminates 50 compilation
                     warnings with GCC 13, GCC 14 and clang 19, as  well  as  1,677  static  analysis
                     warnings.

              v3.1.4 released September 20, 2023
                     Version  3.1.4 fixes a minor bug. It eliminates compilation warnings with GCC 13
                     and clang 18, as well as 1,040 static analysis warnings. The maximal  number  of
                     threads  swarm  can  run  is  now  512, instead of 256. Compilation with runtime
                     checks (`-DNDEBUG`) is now the default. When d > 1, overall  memory  allocations
                     remain  unchanged, but peak RSS memory increased by 6 to 10%, due to a change in
                     the timing of memory deallocations. Peak RSS memory is expected  to  regress  to
                     its prior levels as refactoring continues.

              v3.1.3 released December 5, 2022
                     Version  3.1.3 fixes a regression introduced in version 3.1.1 (memory over-allo‐
                     cation when d > 1). It also fixes a minor off-by-one error when allocating  mem‐
                     ory  for  a Bloom filter, compilation warnings with GCC 12 and clang 13, as well
                     as static analysis warnings. Documentation was improved, as  well  as  our  test
                     suite (swarm-tests).

              v3.1.2 released November 10, 2022
                     Fix  a  bug  with  fastidious mode introduced in version 3.1.1, that could cause
                     Swarm to crash. Probably due to allocating too much memory.

              v3.1.1 released September 29, 2022
                     Version 3.1.1 eliminates a risk of segmentation fault with  extremely  long  se‐
                     quence  headers.  Documentation  and error messages have been improved, and code
                     cleaning continued.

              v3.1.0 released March 1, 2021
                     Version 3.1.0 includes a fix for a bug in the 16-bit SIMD  alignment  code  that
                     was  exposed with a combination of d>1, long sequences, and very high gap penal‐
                     ties. The code has also been been cleaned up, tested and improved substantially,
                     and it is now fully C++11 compliant. Support for macOS on Apple Silicon  (ARM64)
                     has been added.

              v3.0.0 released October 24, 2019
                     Version  3.0.0  introduces  a  faster  algorithm for d = 1, and a reduced memory
                     footprint. Swarm has been ported  to  Windows  x86-64,  GNU/Linux  ARM  64,  and
                     GNU/Linux  POWER8.  Internal  code has been modernized, hardened, and thoroughly
                     tested. Strict dereplication of input sequences is now  mandatory.  The  --seeds
                     option  (-w) now outputs results sorted by decreasing abundance, and then by al‐
                     phabetical order of sequence labels.

              v2.2.2 released December 12, 2017
                     Version 2.2.2 fixes a bug that would cause swarm to wait forever  in  very  rare
                     cases when multiple threads were used.

              v2.2.1 released October 27, 2017
                     Version 2.2.1 fixes a memory allocation bug for d = 1 and duplicated sequences.

              v2.2.0 released October 17, 2017
                     Version 2.2.0 fixes several problems and improves usability. Corrected output to
                     structure  and uclust files when using fastidious mode. Corrected abundance out‐
                     put in some cases. Added check for duplicated sequences and fixed check for  du‐
                     plicated sequence IDs. Checks for empty sequences. Sorts sequences by additional
                     fields to improve stability. Improves compatibility with compilers and operating
                     systems.   Outputs sequences in upper case. Allows 64-bit abundances. Shows mes‐
                     sage when waiting for input from stdin. Improves error  messages  and  warnings.
                     Improves  checking  of  command line options. Fixes remaining errors reported by
                     test suite. Updates documentation.

              v2.1.13 released March 8, 2017
                     Version 2.1.13 removes a bug with the progress bar when writing seeds.

              v2.1.12 released January 16, 2017
                     Version 2.1.12 removes a debugging message.

              v2.1.11 released January 16, 2017
                     Version 2.1.11 fixes two bugs related to the SIMD  implementation  of  alignment
                     that might result in incorrect alignments and scores.  The bug only applies when
                     d > 1.

              v2.1.10 released December 22, 2016
                     Version 2.1.10 fixes two bugs related to gap penalties of alignments.  The first
                     bug  may  lead  to wrong aligments and similarity percentages reported in UCLUST
                     (.uc) files. The second bug makes swarm use  a  slightly  higher  gap  extension
                     penalty  than  specified.  The  default gap extension penalty used have actually
                     been 4.5 instead of 4.

              v2.1.9 released July 6, 2016
                     Version 2.1.9 fixes errors when compiling with GCC version 6.

              v2.1.8 released March 11, 2016
                     Version 2.1.8 fixes a rare bug triggered when clustering extremely short  under‐
                     eplicated sequences. Also, alignment parameters are not shown when d = 1.

              v2.1.7 released February 24, 2016
                     Version  2.1.7  fixes a bug in the output of seeds with the -w option when d > 1
                     that was not properly fixed in version 2.1.6. It also  handles  ascii  character
                     #13  (CR)  in FASTA files better. Swarm will now exit with status 0 if the -h or
                     the -v option is specified. The help text and some error messages have been  im‐
                     proved.

              v2.1.6 released December 14, 2015
                     Version  2.1.6  fixes  problems with older compilers that do not have the x86in‐
                     trin.h header file. It also fixes a bug in the output of seeds with the  -w  op‐
                     tion when d > 1.

              v2.1.5 released September 8, 2015
                     Version 2.1.5 fixes minor bugs.

              v2.1.4 released September 4, 2015
                     Version 2.1.4 fixes minor bugs in the swarm algorithm used for d = 1.

              v2.1.3 released August 28, 2015
                     Version 2.1.3 adds checks of numeric option arguments.

              v2.1.1 released March 31, 2015
                     Version  2.1.1  fixes  a bug with the fastidious option that caused it to ignore
                     some connections between large and small clusters.

              v2.1.0 released March 24, 2015
                     Version 2.1.0 marks the first official release of swarm v2.

              v2.0.7 released March 18, 2015
                     Version 2.0.7 writes abundance information in usearch style when  using  options
                     -w (--seeds) in combination with -z (--usearch-abundance).

              v2.0.6 released March 13, 2015
                     Version 2.0.6 fixes a minor bug.

              v2.0.5 released March 13, 2015
                     Version  2.0.5 improves the implementation of the fastidious option and adds op‐
                     tions to control memory usage of the Bloom filter (-y and -c).  In addition,  an
                     option  (-w)  allows  to  output  cluster representatives sequences with updated
                     abundances (sum of all abundances inside each cluster). This  version  also  en‐
                     ables swarm to run with d = 0.

              v2.0.4 released March 6, 2015
                     Version 2.0.4 includes a fully parallelised implementation of the fastidious op‐
                     tion.

              v2.0.3 released March 4, 2015
                     Version  2.0.3  includes  a working implementation of the fastidious option, but
                     only the initial clustering is parallelized.

              v2.0.2 released February 26, 2015
                     Version 2.0.2 fixes SSSE3 problems.

              v2.0.1 released February 26, 2015
                     Version 2.0.1 is a development version that contains a partial implementation of
                     the fastidious option, but it is not usable yet.

              v2.0.0 released December 3, 2014
                     Version 2.0.0 is faster and easier to use, providing new output  options  (--in‐
                     ternal-structure  and  --log),  new  control  options (--boundary, --fastidious,
                     --no-otu-breaking), and built-in cluster refinement (no need to use  the  python
                     script  anymore). When using default parameters, a novel and considerably faster
                     algorithmic approach is used, guaranteeing swarm's scalability.

              v1.2.21 released February 26, 2015
                     Version 1.2.21 is supposed to fix some problems related to the use of the  SSSE3
                     CPU instructions which are not always available.

              v1.2.20 released November 6, 2014
                     Version  1.2.20 presents a production-ready version of the alternative algorithm
                     (option -a), with optional built-in cluster breaking (option -n). That  alterna‐
                     tive  algorithmic  approach (usable only with d = 1) is considerably faster than
                     currently used clustering algorithms, and can deal with datasets of 100  million
                     unique  amplicons  or  more  in  a few hours. Of course, results are rigourously
                     identical to the results previously produced with swarm. That release  also  in‐
                     troduces new options to control swarm output (options -i and -l).

              v1.2.19 released October 3, 2014
                     Version  1.2.19  fixes  a  problem related to abundance information when the se‐
                     quence label includes multiple underscore characters.

              v1.2.18 released September 29, 2014
                     Version 1.2.18 reenables the possibility of reading sequences from stdin  if  no
                     file  name  is specified on the command line. It also fixes a bug related to CPU
                     features detection.

              v1.2.17 released September 28, 2014
                     Version 1.2.17 fixes a memory allocation bug introduced in version 1.2.15.

              v1.2.16 released September 27, 2014
                     Version 1.2.16 fixes a bug in the abundance sort introduced in version 1.2.15.

              v1.2.15 released September 27, 2014
                     Version 1.2.15 sorts the input sequences in order of decreasing abundance unless
                     they are detected to be sorted already. When using the alternative algorithm for
                     d = 1 it also sorts all subseeds in order of decreasing abundance.

              v1.2.14 released September 27, 2014
                     Version 1.2.14 fixes a bug in the output with the  --swarm_breaker  option  (-b)
                     when using the alternative algorithm (-a).

              v1.2.12 released August 18, 2014
                     Version  1.2.12 introduces an option --alternative-algorithm to use an extremely
                     fast, experimental clustering algorithm for the special case d = 1. Multithread‐
                     ing scalability of the default algorithm has been noticeably improved.

              v1.2.10 released August 8, 2014
                     Version 1.2.10 allows amplicon abundances to  be  specified  using  the  usearch
                     style in the sequence header (e.g. '>id;size=1') when the -z option is chosen.

              v1.2.8 released August 5, 2014
                     Version  1.2.8  fixes an error with the gap extension penalty. Previous versions
                     used a gap penalty twice as large as intended. That bug correction induces small
                     changes in clustering results.

              v1.2.6 released May 23, 2014
                     Version 1.2.6 introduces an option --mothur to output clustering  results  in  a
                     format  compatible  with the microbial ecology community analysis software suite
                     Mothur ( https://www.mothur.org/).

              v1.2.5 released April 11, 2014
                     Version 1.2.5 removes the need for a POPCNT hardware instruction to be  present.
                     swarm  now  automatically checks whether POPCNT is available and uses a slightly
                     slower software implementation if not. Only basic SSE2 instructions are now  re‐
                     quired to run swarm.

              v1.2.4 released January 30, 2014
                     Version  1.2.4 introduces an option --break-swarms to output all pairs of ampli‐
                     cons with d differences to standard error. That option is used by the  companion
                     script  `swarm_breaker.py` to refine swarm results. The syntax of the inline as‐
                     sembly code is changed for compatibility with more compilers.

              v1.2 released May 16, 2013
                     Version 1.2 greatly improves speed by using alignment-free comparisons of ampli‐
                     cons based on k-mer word content. For each amplicon, the presence-absence of all
                     possible 5-mers is computed and recorded in a 1024-bits vector.  Vector  compar‐
                     isons  are  extremely  fast and drastically reduce the number of costly pairwise
                     alignments performed by swarm. While remaining exact, swarm 1.2 can be more than
                     100-times faster than swarm 1.1, when using a single thread with a large set  of
                     sequences.  The  minor  version 1.1.1, published just before, adds compatibility
                     with Apple computers, and corrects an issue in  the  pairwise  global  alignment
                     step that could lead to sub-optimal alignments.

              v1.1 released February 26, 2013
                     Version  1.1  introduces  two  new  important options: the possibility to output
                     clustering results using the uclust output format, and the possibility to output
                     detailed statistics on each cluster. swarm 1.1 is also  faster:  new  filterings
                     based  on  pairwise amplicon sequence lengths and composition comparisons reduce
                     the number of pairwise alignments needed and speed up the clustering.

              v1.0 released November 10, 2012
                     First public release.

version 3.1.6                              November 7, 2025                                  swarm(1)
